# Review
## History
Iran dates back to the Persian Empire. It originally practiced Zoroastrianism until the introduction of Sunni Islam in the, and still speaks Farsi, an Indo-European language, instead of Arabic, a Semitic language. In the 16th century, Iranian kings converted to Shi'a Islam to distance themselves from the enemies the Turks and Arabs.\
The Pahlavi dynasty is established in the early 20th century with British support. Reza Shah instituted a policy of modernizing authoritarianism. The Shah is ousted during WWII by Britain and the USSR, fearing that he would sell oil to the Germans. When Britain and the USSR leave, Reza Shah's son, Muhammad Reza Shah, takes the thrown and gradually builds more power for himself, until his is the effective ruler of Iran, after Mosaddegh, the prime minister, is ousted in a CIA coup to protect Western oil interests in Iran. The Shah begins the "White Revolution", a series of liberalizing reforms aimed at modernizing Iran, marginalizing Communism and centralizing power. In the 1960s, Iranian begin to protest the Shah's regime. In the late 1970s, the Shah's power begins to slip, and he is forced into political liberalization.\
In 1979, the Shah is overthrown by an Islamic Revolution (because all secular opposition had been suppressed under the Shah). An Islamic Republic is established in his place. The first PM, who had been proposing a more Western style of government is forced to resign when he is shown to be powerless during the Iran Hostage Crisis. The new constitution is based on Khomeini's interpretation of velayat-e faqih, and is approved by the voters. The Revolutionary regime begins to consolidate power, targeting religious minorities, and non-Khomeini allied revolutionaries. The government, with new oil revenue from the oil boom, sets out to help the rural poor.\
The first elections see the Islamic Republican Party (IRP), win strong majority of the seats (though only a plurality of the popular vote). In the second elections the opposition is banned because of the Iran-Iraq war, the IRP wins by a landslide with a clerically controlled media, though voter turnout drops from 80 to 60%. In the third elections, the IRP splits into two Islamist factions, the economically liberal Jam'eh and the economically conservative Majmu'eh. In 1989, Khomeini dies and is replaced by President Khamenei, who is more economically liberal. From 1989 to 2005, liberal presidents Rafsanjani and Khatami pursue programs of economic reform while maintaining the repressive political system (with the exception of some of Khatami's attempted reforms). In 2004, with the United States involved in Iraq and Afghanistan, the more conservative Ahmadinejad wins the election. Ahmadinejad looses some of his influence until 2009 election, when he wins by a rigged vote (though probably would have won, albeit less cleanly, anyway). The rigging of the elections causes mass protest, which the government cracks down on harshly. In the 2013 presidential election, (most allowed) reform candidate Rouhani wins.\
Under the Shah, Iran had had a nuclear research program, which was disapproved of by the West. Khomeini shutdown the program declaring it un-Islamic. Khamenei restarted the program. In 2006, the UN imposed sanctions against Iran, preventing it from selling to the West and freezing it assets. In 2013, negotiations allowed the release of Iranian money for oils sales already made on the condition that they give up, and stop producing weapons grade uranium.

## Government
Since the revolution the government has been a mix of theocracy and democracy, though how democratic it is is unclear. Iran had been a West influenced authoritarian system under the Shah. The Revolutionary regime, based on Khomeini's principle of velayat-e faqih or guardianship of the political system by the Islamic scholars. Previous interpretation of Islamic law had instructed clergy to remain out of politics, believing that any government until the coming of the 12th Imam was illegitimate.\
In keeping with velayat-e faqih, the Leader, a senior member of the clergy, oversees all politics. The Leader is nominated by the council of religious experts, a body of Shi'ite clerics elected by universal suffrage. The Leader is responsible for the appointment of key members of government such as the heads of military, Chief Judge, Guardian Council and Expediency council, and approval of the elected President. The Guardian council reviews all legislation passed by and must approve all candidates for the Majlis. The approval process is has two steps, clerical review, and general review. The first, including only clerics, checks for adherence to Shari'a, while the second, including both clerics and non-clerical members of the Guardian Council, checks for adherence to the 1979 state constitution. The Expediency Council is a forum in which members of the highly check-and-balanced system can work out legislation before it is introduced. The President, has traditional presidential powers though is ultimately accountable to the Leader. The Majilis is again similar to a traditional legislative branch, but heavily checked by the Guardian Council. The judicial system is highly centralized, based on Shari'a and controlled by the state. The key members of government are frequently, and many times required to be clerics.

## Economy
Under the Shah, Iran had great inequality, especially between rural and urban areas. Iran was a Rentier state, funding its operations with oil revenues rather than taxes. This allowed the Shah to become disconnected from the people and addressing the interests of the rich, following a largely-ineffective policy of trickle-down economics. The policy failed because the elite used their advantaged position to buy from the West rather than investing in the domestic economy.\
The Revolutionary government became highly controlling of the economy during the Iran-Iraq war. Beginning 1989, the government began to liberalize in the global climate of neo-liberalism. Other factors were poor economic performance stemming from oil price collapses of the mid-1980s, the end of the Iran-Iraq war and the ascension of Khamenei. Presidents Rasfanjani and Khatami followed these policies, privatizing SOEs, lifting trade restrictions and encouraging investment both foreign and domestic (including allowing outright ownership of Iranian businesses by foreign multinationals. However, privatization was not very successful because the SOEs resisted privatization and those that were sold off went primarily to religious foundations.\
Ahmadenijad won in a swing against neo-liberalism, with the rural support and public sector support fearing further privatization and end to subsidies. Eventually, out of economic necessity, Ahmadenijad was forced to cut subsidies proposing a cash transfer system to improve efficiency based on foreign programs such as Mexico's Opurtunidades. Wide spread public opposition forced a postponement halting of any further plans to cut subsidies.\
Iran struggles economically given its economic and political position. Iran's revolutionary goverment, despite and unsustainable increase in domestic agriculture (by depleting ground water), has failed to move Iran away from being a Rentier state. It is still heavily dependent of foreign oil revenues, many of which have been stopped because of economic sanctions imposed because of its nuclear program. Because of this, Iran maintains a high inflation and unemployment rate.\
Despite its economic struggles, Iran has been able to make significant advances since the revolution. Infant mortality has dropped, bringing life expectancy up with it. Iranian standards of living have improved, with car ownership up over 100x since the revolution. Also Iran now has near universal literacy for those under 40. Iran has been able to adapt to minimize the impact of sanctions focusing on trade with the rest of Asia, both east and west. Finally, it has been able to maintain a low birth rate after a government encouraged baby boom shortly after the revolution.
